= The Rendering Loop
James Elliott <james@deepsymmetry.org>
:icons: font
:toc:
:toc-placement: preamble

// Set up support for relative links on GitHub; add more conditions
// if you need to support other environments and extensions.
ifdef::env-github[:outfilesuffix: .adoc]

This page contains advanced, low-level information for people who are
ready to create their own custom effect algorithms. Not to scare you
off, but don't be discouraged if you are new to Afterglow, and this
content seems rather difficult. Start experimenting in other places,
and by the time you need this information, it will make much more
sense!

And once you are ready to really dive deep, you can learn how to
<<rendering_loop#extensions,extend>> the rendering loop to incorporate
completely new kinds of elements, such as integrating with Pangolin
Beyond laser shows.

== Frame Rendering Stages

When an afterglow show is running, that is, from when
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-start.21[(show/start!)]
has been called, until
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-stop.21[(show/stop!)]
or
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-stop-all.21[(show/stop-all!)]
is called, there is a background task scheduled to run many times per
second, to calculate the next “frame” of control values to send to the
universes controlled by the show, and then send those values. The rate
at which this activity is scheduled is determined by the
`refresh-interval` value established when the show was
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-show[created].
If not explicitly set as a parameter to `(show/show)`, an interval of
25 milliseconds is used, causing the lights to be updated forty times
each second. If your DMX interface is running at a different rate, you
will want to configure your show to match it, so that you are getting
the best results possible without wasting computation on frames that
never get seen.

TIP: Once a show has started running, you can get a sense of how heavily it
is taxing your hardware by looking at the show’s `:statistics` atom:

[source,clojure]
----
(clojure.pprint/pprint @(:statistics *show*))
; {:afterglow-version "0.1.0-SNAPSHOT",
;  :total-time 70429,
;  :frames-sent 105828,
;  :average-duration 0.6655044,
;  :recent #amalloy/ring-buffer [30 (0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1)],
;  :recent-total 6,
;  :recent-average 0.2}
; -> nil
----
____
This tells you how many milliseconds have been spent in the rendering
loop while the show is running, how many frames of DMX data have been
sent to the show universes, and the average number of milliseconds spent
in the rendering loop. If the duration of a rendering cycle ever exceeds
the refresh interval, Afterglow will log a warning that it is unable to
keep up with the effects you are trying to run.

If you have a show&rsquo;s web interface open, the `:recent` keys in
this atom are used to display the Load bar at the top of the screen,
which fills up and turns red as the time within each frame available
for calculating and sending control values to the lights gets used up.
____

When it is time to determine the next set of values to send to the
show’s patched fixtures, this is what happens:

. The first thing Afterglow does is take a
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.rhythm.html#var-ISnapshot[snapshot]
of the show
https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow/wiki/Metronomes[metronome] to
identify a common point in time for all the effects to use in deciding
how they should look. This enables a consistent, coordinated appearance
for everything in the frame.

. The next step is to zero out the buffers that will be used to send
DMX data for each universe, so that if no effect tries to set a value
for a particular channel on this frame, a zero value will be sent for
it.

. Then Afterglow loops over all
<<effects#effects,Effects>> that are currently active
for the show, and asks if any are ready to end, as described in the
<<effects#the-effect-lifecycle,Effect Lifecycle>> section. If any are,
they are removed from the list of active effects.

. Then it makes another loop over any effects that did not end, to see
how they want to affect the lights. It does this by calling, in order,
each effect’s
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-generate[generate]
function, passing in the show and the metronome snapshot. In order to
make the lights do things, each effect returns a list of
<<rendering_loop#assigners,Assigners>> specifying the things it wants
to happen. These are gathered in the order they were returned by each
effect.

. While being gathered, the assigners are separated into individual
lists, divided first by the `kind` value of the assigner (`:channel`,
`:function`, `:color`, `:pan-tilt`, `:direction`, or `:aim`), and
within each kind, further divided into lists based on the target ID
that the assigner wants to affect. Since the effects are run in
priority order (lower priority first, with effects of the same
priority running in the order in which they were added to the show),
higher-priority and more recent effects’ assigners will come later in
the gathered lists, and will get the chance to modify or veto any
assigners from earlier and lower-priority effects which are trying to
control the same thing. If the effect doesn’t want to do anything this
frame, it can simply return an empty assigner list.

. Once all the assigners have been collected into their kind/target
lists, each list is evaluated. The assigner kinds are processed in the
order established by
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-resolution-order[show/resolution-order]
and starts with low-level, single channel `:channel` assigners, then
moves up to more complex `:function`, `:color`, `:pan-tilt`,
`:direction`, and `:aim` assigners. (This order was chosen because
different kinds of assigners might end up affecting the same DMX
channel; the higher levels of abstraction are allowed to win by
running last.) Within each kind, however, the lists can be processed
in parallel, since they will all affect separate targets.
+
To process a list, each assigner’s
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-assign[assign]
function is called, again passing in the show and the metronome
snapshot, the target which is being assigned (a DMX channel in a show
universe, or a fixture or fixture head, depending on the assigner
kind), as well as the assignment value the effect wanted to establish
(a number, color, or head direction, again depending on the assigner
type), and the previous assignment (if any) that an earlier assigner
wanted to set for this target. The assigner can decide what to do with
the previous assignment: Ignore it, blend the current assignment with
it somehow, or honor it, depending on the nature and configuration of
the assigner. The `assign` function returns a single resolved value of
the appropriate type for the assignment, and Afterglow records it,
potentially to pass it to the next assigner on the list. The assigner
can also veto any previous assignment and say that nothing should
happen by returning an assignment with `nil` for its value.
+
The input to `assign` might be a
<<parameters#dynamic-parameters,Dynamic Parameter>>, and the resulting
value may be as well, or the assigner may choose to resolve it into a
non-dynamic value, in order to decide between or blend competing
assignments.
+
At the end of this process, Afterglow is left with a single assigned
value for every target which any effect wanted to influence for the
current frame.

. Afterglow uses these assignment results to establish actual DMX
values for the frame, using the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-resolve-assignment[resolve-assignment]
multimethod, whose implementations (which are specific for each of the
possible assignment kinds) finally resolve any remaining dynamic
parameters, and then turn abstractions like color objects and aiming
vectors into appropriate DMX channel values for the target that is
being assigned.

. Finally, the resulting buffers of DMX values, with zeros in any
channels which were not affected by assigners, are sent to their
corresponding universes, causing the lights to produce the desired
effects.

[[assigners]]
== Assigners

As described above, the role of an assigner in the rendering loop is
to actually decide what _value_ (color, direction, or the like) is
going to be sent to a _target_ (a lighting fixture head for more
abstract assigners, or a simple DMX channel for Channel assigners), at
a given point in time. It really is the heart of implementing an effect.

The assigner fulfills this responsibility by implementing the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-assign[assign]
function in the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-IAssigner[IAssigner]
protocol. It is passed the show, the metronome snapshot which
identifies the point in musical time that has been reached, the target
being assigned, and the value that any earlier assigners of the same
type have decided should be assigned to the target.

It performs its magic, using the values established in setting up the
effect, and the algorithm that the effect author designed, to come up
with the resulting value that it wants assigned to the target, which
may or may not be influenced by the previous assignment, and returns
that value for Afterglow to either use, or pass on to the next
assigner of that type in the effect chain.

The best way to understand this is probably to look at examples of
effects that ship with Afterglow, starting with simple ones like
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.color.html#var-color-effect[color-effect],
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.dimmer.html[dimmer-effect],
and
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.movement.html#var-direction-effect[direction-effect],
then slightly more complex
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.fun.html#var-strobe[strobe]
and
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.fun.html#var-sparkle[sparkle]
effects, and on up to more sophisticated compound effects like
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.fun.html#var-color-cycle-chase[color-cycle-chase],
and the spatially mapped elaborations of it like
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.fun.html#var-iris-out-color-cycle-chase[iris-out-color-cycle-chase].

Once you can understand how all of those pieces fit together, you will
be ready to build your own complex and mesmerizing effects!

[[channel-assigners]]
=== Channel Assigners

Channel assigners have a `kind` of `:channel`, and their `target-id`
is a keyword of the form `:u1a234` which would represent an assignment
to universe `1`, address `234`. The assignment values they return are
either a valid DMX data value (see next paragraph), a
<<parameters#dynamic-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will resolve
to a valid DMX data value, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should take
place.


[[dmx-values]] The DMX data value is a number in the range `[0-256)`.
In other words, it can take any value from zero up to but not reaching
256. Non-integer values are supported, because the channel might be a
https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow/blob/master/doc/fixture_definitions.adoc#generic-channels[fine-channel]
which uses two bytes to offer more precision in control than a single
byte can offer. In that case, the integer portion of the value is sent
as the most-significant byte on the main channel, and the fractional
portion is converted to a least-significant byte and sent on the fine
channel. If the channel does not have a fine channel attached to it,
any fractional part of the assigned value is simply discarded.

Channels can also be _inverted_, which means the DMX values are
reversed from the value being assigned. This is needed to support some
fixtures which have inverted dimmers, is established by the presence
of an `:inverted-from` entry in the
https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow/blob/master/doc/fixture_definitions.adoc#inverted-channels[channel
specification], and taken care of by
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.channel.html#var-apply-channel-value[apply-channel-value],
which is invoked by the channel assignment resolver, so channel
assigners do not need to worry about this detail, and can always work
in terms of non-inverted channel values. (This is important, for
example, when implementing highest-takes-precedence rules for a dimmer
channel. Bigger numbers will always mean brighter, even if at the last
step before sending them to the fixture they are inverted because of
the nature of the channel.)

[[function-assigners]]
=== Function Assigners

Function assigners have a `kind` of `:function`, and their `target-id`
is a keyword of the form `:3-strobe` which would represent an
assignment to the fixture or head with ID 3, setting the value of that
head's `:strobe`
https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow/blob/master/doc/fixture_definitions.adoc#function-specifications[function].
The assignment values they return are either a percentage value, a
<<parameters#dynamic-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will resolve
to a percentage value, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should take
place.

When the assignment is resolved, the percentage is translated to an
actual DMX value along the range defined in each fixture's function
specification. For example, if the function was defined as existing on
the range 20-29 for a particular fixture, and the assigned percentage
was 50.0, then the assignment for that fixture would send a value of
25 to the function's channel.

[[color-assigners]]
=== Color Assigners

Color assigners have a `kind` of `:color`, and their `target-id` is a
keyword of the form `:i42` which would represent an assignment to the
fixture or head with ID 42. The assignment values they return are
either a
https://github.com/brunchboy/afterglow/blob/master/doc/color.adoc#working-with-color[color]
object, a <<parameters#color-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will
resolve to a color object, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should take
place.

When the assignment is resolved, Afterglow uses all available color
channels in the target head to mix the specified color. It is
automatically able to use `:color` intensity channels of type `:red`,
`:green`, `:blue`, and `:white`. It will also use any other `:color`
channels whose hue has been
<<fixture_definitions#hue-mixing,specified>> in the fixture
definition.

If the head or fixture uses a color wheel to make colors, rather than
trying to mix colors using channel intensities, Afterglow will find
the <<fixture_definitions#color-wheel-hue,color wheel hue>> closest to
the hue of the color being assigned, and send the function value
needed to set the color wheel to that position. The color wheel hue
has to be &ldquo;close enough&rdquo; to the assigned hue for Afterglow
to use it. By default, as long as the hue values are within 60&deg; of
each other (which is very lenient), Afterglow will use it. You can
adjust this tolerance by setting a different value in the show
variable `:color-wheel-hue-tolerance`.

[[pan-tilt-assigners]]
=== Pan/Tilt Assigners

Pan/Tilt assigners have a `kind` of `:pan-tilt`, and their
`target-id` is a keyword of the form `:i68` which would represent an
assignment to the fixture or head with ID 68. The assignment values
they return are either a `javax.vecmath.Vector2d`, a
<<parameters#direction-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will
resolve to a `Vector2d` object, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should
take place.

When the assignment is resolved, the vector indicates the pan and tilt
angles away from the `z` axis of the <<show_space#show-space,frame of
reference of the show>> to aim the fixture or head. Afterglow
translates this vector to the appropriate values to send to the
fixture's pan and tilt channels to aim it in the specified direction,
if possible. Otherwise it gets as close as the fixture allows.

If multiple fixtures or heads are assigned the same pan-tilt vector,
they will all be aimed in exactly the same direction, regardless of
the location and orientation with which they were hung.

NOTE: If there is an active Direction or Aim Assigner which affects
the same target, it will run later, so its effects will be the ones
that matter.

[[direction-assigners]]
=== Direction Assigners

Direction assigners have a `kind` of `:direction`, and their
`target-id` is a keyword of the form `:i68` which would represent an
assignment to the fixture or head with ID 68. The assignment values
they return are either a `javax.vecmath.Vector3d`, a
<<parameters#direction-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will
resolve to a `Vector3d` object, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should
take place.

When the assignment is resolved, the vector indicates the direction in
the <<show_space#show-space,frame of reference of the show>> to aim
the fixture or head. Afterglow translates this vector to the
appropriate values to send to the fixture's pan and tilt channels to
aim it in the specified direction, if possible. Otherwise it gets as
close as the fixture allows.

If multiple fixtures or heads are assigned the same direction vector,
they will all be aimed in exactly the same direction, regardless of
the location and orientation with which they were hung.

NOTE: If there is an active Aim Assigner which affects the same
target, it will run later, so its effects will be the ones that matter.

[[aim-assigners]]
=== Aim Assigners

Aim assigners have a `kind` of `:aim`, and their `target-id` is a
keyword of the form `:i17` which would represent an assignment to the
fixture or head with ID 17. The assignment values they return are
either a `javax.vecmath.Point3d`, a
<<parameters#aim-parameters,dynamic parameter>> which will resolve to
a `Point3d` object, or `nil`, meaning no assignment should take place.

When the assignment is resolved, the point identifies the precise
location in the <<show_space#show-space,frame of reference of the
show>> to aim the fixture or head. Afterglow translates this point to
the appropriate values to send to the fixture's pan and tilt channels
to aim it at that exact spot, if possible. Otherwise it gets as close
as the fixture allows.

If multiple fixtures or heads are assigned the same aiming point, they
will all be aimed at exactly the same spot, regardless of the location
and orientation with which they were hung.

== Extensions

If you want Afterglow to control something that does not respond to
DMX values, you might be able to do so by extending the rendering
loop. There is an example of doing just this to control laser shows by
communicating with Pangolin's Beyond software in the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.beyond.html[afterglow.beyond]
namespace, and another example in
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.show-variable.html[afterglow.effects.show-variable],
which creates effects that set show variables when they are run.

=== Introducing New Assigner Types

The first thing you need to do is identify the kinds of assigners that
your new effect types will need. They will need their own unique
`kind` keywords, and a structure for their `target-id` values which
lets Afterglow keep track of which assigners are affecting the same
value. The Beyond integration uses `:beyond-color` and `:beyond-cue`
for `kind` values. `:beyond-color` is global, and thus uses a
`target-id` that references the entire Beyond server instance. In
contrast, more than one `:beyond-cue` can be active at once, so its
`target-id` is composed of both the server ID and the cue number.

Afterglow needs to be told how to handle your new kinds of assigners.
First, you need to establish the order in which they should be run by
calling
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-set-extension-resolution-order.21[show/set-extension-resolution-order!]
with your unique extension key and the list of all your assigner types
in the order in which they should be resolved. You need to do this
even if you don't care about the order, or have only one new assigner
type, in order to get them added to stage 6 of the frame rendering
process, as described above. This is done towards the end of the
Beyond extension source, if you would like to see a concrete example.

Then you need to tell afterglow how to actually resolve one of your
assigners. You do this in the same way Afterglow registers its own
built-in assigners, by using `defmethod` to add a new implementation
of the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-resolve-assignment[resolve-assignment]
multimethod, for your new assigner keyword. Again, the end of the
Beyond integration provides a concrete example.

=== Customizing Fades for your Assigner Types

If you want to support smooth fades between different values being
returned by your assigners, you will also want to `defmethod` an
implementation of the
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.effects.html#var-fade-between-assignments[fade-between-assignments]
multimethod. This is the last thing that the Beyond integration does.

TIP: If you do not provide an implementation of
`fade-between-assignments` tailored to your specific assigner `kind`,
the default implementation is used: it simply selects whichever
assigner is on the side of the fade which is currently above 50%.

=== Buffering and Sending Your Frame Data

Chances are good that your extension will need to do some sort of
setup at the start of a frame before your assigners can be resolved,
and then will want to actually do something when the frame is rendered
and being sent to the lights. To accomplish these tasks, you register
functions with a show:
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-add-empty-buffer-fn.21[add-empty-buffer-fn!]
tells the show to call the supplied function when a frame is about to
be rendered, allowing you to set up any buffers your assigners will
need, and
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.show.html#var-add-send-buffer-fn.21[add-send-buffer-fn!]
tells the show to call the supplied function when it is time to
actually send out the frame. The Beyond integration calls these in its
http://deepsymmetry.org/afterglow/doc/afterglow.beyond.html#var-bind-to-show[bind-to-show]
function.

Having done all these things, it becomes possible to create cues which
launch or end Beyond laser cues, and effects which change the color of
the laser beam to match (or contrast with) colors being sent to the
lights, as well as effects which simply set show variables so that
other effects can respond to the fact that they are running. Perhaps
looking at these example implementations can help inspire your own
extension in a completely new direction! (Links to the namespaces' API
documentation are at the <<rendering_loop#extensions,top>> of this
section, and as always, the API docs have `view source` buttons which
take you right to the code that makes them work.)

==== License

+++<a href="http://deepsymmetry.org"><img src="assets/DS-logo-bw-200-padded-left.png" align="right" alt="Deep Symmetry logo"></a>+++
Copyright © 2015 http://deepsymmetry.org[Deep Symmetry, LLC]

Distributed under the
http://opensource.org/licenses/eclipse-1.0.php[Eclipse Public License
1.0], the same as Clojure. By using this software in any fashion, you
are agreeing to be bound by the terms of this license. You must not
remove this notice, or any other, from this software. A copy of the
license can be found in
https://cdn.rawgit.com/brunchboy/afterglow/master/resources/public/epl-v10.html[resources/public/epl-v10.html]
within this project.
