= Using the Novation Launchpad Family
James Elliott <james@deepsymmetry.org>

Novation makes an entire family of grid controllers which can all be
used with Afterglow, with differing capabilities. The most powerful is
the Launchpad Pro, with pressure-sensitive RGB pads.

[[binding-to-a-launchpad]]
== Binding to a Launchpad

Assuming you have a Launchpad family controller connected to the
machine running Afterglow, Afterglow will find and activate it as soon
as you have set up the sample show. You will see a brief startup
animation, and Afterglow's appropriate Launchpad interface will start.

TIP: For information about how to set up bindings without the sample
show, or more details about how it works, see
<<mapping_sync.adoc#setting-up-grid-controller-bindings,Setting Up Grid
Controller Bindings>>.

[[using-launchpad-pro]]
== Using Launchpad Pro

With its pressure-sensitive, RGB-capable 8&times;8 pad grid, the
Novation Launchpad Pro makes an excellent grid controller for
Afterglow, and has its own custom
{api-doc}afterglow.controllers.launchpad-pro.html[mapping].

> There are also mappings for the
  <<using-launchpad-mk2,Launchpad Mk2>>,
  <<using-launchpad-mini-and-launchpad-s,Launchpad Mini,
  and Launchpad S>>

Here is what the Launchpad Pro interface looks like:

image::LaunchpadPro.jpg[Launchpad Pro interface,1000,1011]

[[show-control]]
=== Show Control

Once you have the Launchpad linked to a show, it becomes a helpful way
to monitor and control the cues and manage the musical synchronization
of the show.

The red kbd:[Stop] button at the bottom can be used to stop a running
show, which will suspend the processing of its effects, and black out
all universes assigned to the show. The button will be illuminated
brightly while the show is stopped. Pressing it again will restart the
show where it would have been had it not stopped, and dim the button
again.

Most of the space on the interface is dedicated to an 8&times;8 grid
of color coded cue trigger pads, which provide a window onto the
show's overall <<cues.adoc#,cue grid>>. The Launchpad can be
<<README.adoc#scrolling-and-linked-controllers,linked>> to the
<<README.adoc#web-ui,web interface>> so that both always display the same
section of the cue grid, and the web interface can remind you of the
names of the cues you are looking at, or it can be scrolled
independently, allowing you access to more cues at the same time.

TIP: If you have more than one compatible grid controller, you can
have Afterglow using all of them at the same time; each can be
scrolled to different areas of the cue grid, and each can even be
linked to a different browser window if you have that much screen
space.

You can activate any cue shown by pressing its pad; running cues will
light up, and darken again when they end. If the cues are configured
to respond to velocity, you can adjust the corresponding variables by
how hard you are pressing on the pad while the cue is running.

To stop a running cue, press its pad again. Some cues will end
immediately, others will continue to run until they reach what they
feel is an appropriate stopping point. While they are in the process
of ending, the cue pad will blink. If you want the cue to end
immediately even though it would otherwise run for a while longer, you
can press the blinking cue pad again and it will be killed right then.

The colors assigned to cue pads by the creator of the cue grid are
intended to help identify related cues. Some cues (especially intense
ones like strobes) are configured to run only as long as they are held
down. In that case, when you press cue pad, it lights up with a
whitened version of the cue color as a hint that this is happening,
and as soon as you release the pad, the cue will end. If you want to
override this behavior, you can hold down the kbd:[Shift] button
(towards the top left of the Launchpad Pro) as you press the cue pad,
and it will activate as a normal cue, staying on until you press it a
second time.

As noted above, cues can also be configured to take advantage of the
pressure sensitivity of the Launchpad Pro cue pads, so that as you
vary the pressure with which you are holding down the pad, some
visible variable of the cue is altered. The strobe and sparkle cues
in created by
{api-doc}afterglow.examples.html#var-make-cues[`afterglow.examples/make-cues`]
for the sample show work this way: the intensity and lightness of the
strobe are increased by pressure, and so is the chance that a sparkle
will be assigned to a light on each frame.

NOTE: In order for aftertouch to work with your cues--in other words,
for you to be able to adjust cue variables by varing pressure on the
pad after you have launched it--you need to set your Launchpad Pro's
*Aftertouch* mode to *Polyphonic*, as described in the *Setup Button*
section of the
https://downloads.novationmusic.com/novation/launchpad-mk2/launchpad-pro[User
Guide]. You might also want to set the *Aftertouch Threshold* to
*Low*.

Cues may be mutually exclusive by nature, and if they were created to
reflect this (by using the same keyword to register their effects with
the show, or specifying other effect keys in their `:end-keys` list),
when you activate one, the other cues which use the same keyword are
dimmed. This is a hint that when you activate one of them, it will
_replace_ the others, rather than running at the same time. (There are
photos demonstrating this effect on the
<<push2.adoc#numeric-cue-variables,Ableton Push page>>.)

[[scrolling]]
=== Scrolling

The show will likely have many more cues than fit on the pad grid; the
row of arrow buttons at the top left allow you to page through the
larger show grid. If there are more cues available in a given
direction, that arrow will be lit, otherwise it is dark. Pressing an
active arrow scrolls the view one &ldquo;page&rdquo; in that
direction. In the photo below, it is currently possible to scroll down
and to the left:

image::LaunchpadPro-scroll.jpg[Launchpad Pro interface,800,539]

If you hold down the kbd:[Shift] button, the arrows will scroll you as
far as possible in the direction that you press.

[[metronome-control]]
=== Metronome Control

The kbd:[Click] button lets you monitor and adjust the Metronome that
the show is using to keep time with the music that is being played.
Since Afterglow's effects are generally defined with respect to the
metronome, it is important to keep it synchronized with the music. The
kbd:[Click] button label flashes at each beat, and the color of the
button tells you whether the metronome is syncronized to an external
source. If it is blue, as in the first photo in this section, the
tempo is being set manually. If green, as is shown right above, then
tempo is being driven by an external source, such as MIDI or DJ Link
Pro. If the button is red, it means that Afterglow was configured to
sync to some external source, but has lost contact with it.

The most basic way of synchronizing the metronome is to tap the
kbd:[Click] button at each beat of the music. Tapping the button
aligns the metronome to a beat, and if you tap it three or more times
within two seconds of each preceding tap, sets the metronome's BPM.
Tap it as you hear each beat of the music, and after three or more
taps, the speed of the metronome will be approximately synchronized
with the music.

Once the tempo is correct, you can tell Afterglow which beat is the
down beat by holding down the kbd:[Shift] button while pressing
kbd:[Click]. This combination does not change the tempo, but tells
Afterglow that the moment when you tapped the button is the down beat
(the first beat of a bar).

Trying to keep up with tempo changes during dynamic shows can be
tedious, so you will hopefully be able to take advantage of
Afterglow's metronome synchronization features. If the DJ can send you
<<mapping_sync.adoc#syncing-to-midi-clock,MIDI clock pulses>>, or you can
connect via a Local Area Network to Pioneer professional DJ gear to
lock into the beat grid established by
<<mapping_sync.adoc#syncing-to-pro-dj-link,Pro DJ Link>>, Afterglow can
keep the BPM (with MIDI) and even the beats (with Pro DJ Link and the
Traktor Afterglow Beat Phase
<<mapping_sync.adoc#syncing-to-traktor-beat-phase,controller mapping>>)
synchronized for you. You can use the <<README.adoc#metronome-control,web
interface>> to configure metronome sync.

Once your sync is established, the meaning of the kbd:[Click] button
changes. If you are using MIDI clock to sync the BPM, it becomes a
kbd:[Tap Beat] button, which simply establishes where the beat falls.
If you are locked in to a Pro DJ Link beat grid or using the Traktor
beat phase mapping, the beats are automatically aligned for you so, it
becomes a kbd:[Tap Bar] button which, when pressed, indicates that the
current beat is the down beat (start) of a bar. In these sync modes
you can also use the kbd:[Shift] button to align at the next bigger
boundary: If tapping kbd:[Click] would normally move the bar,
shift-tapping will move the phrase.

[[sharing-the-launchpad-pro]]
=== Sharing the Launchpad Pro

If you are using Afterglow at the same time as Ableton Live, you can
switch back and forth between which has control of the Launchpad Pro
by pressing the kbd:[User] button. If Live is not running when you
press kbd:[User], the Launchpad interface will simply go blank (except for
the kbd:[User] button itself), until you press it again, at which
point Afterglow will light it up.

NOTE: Future releases may take advantage of more of the buttons on the
controller.

[[using-launchpad-mk2]]
== Using Launchpad Mk2

The Launchpad Mk2 is very similar to the Pro, except that it lacks
velocity sensitivity and has fewer buttons outside the cue grid. For
the most part you can follow the
<<using-launchpad-pro,Launchpad Pro>> instructions above
(ignoring the discussion of velocity sensitivity and aftertouch
configuration), but refer to the button mapping shown for the
Launchpad Mini and Launchpad S
<<launchpad-mini-image,below>>, because the Launchpad Mk2
{api-doc}afterglow.controllers.launchpad-mk2.html[mapping] uses the
same arrangement of round buttons as those controllers.

[[using-launchpad-mini-and-launchpad-s]]
== Using Launchpad Mini and Launchpad S

These two controllers share the same
{api-doc}afterglow.controllers.launchpad-mini.html[mapping] because
they are functionally identical--the Mini is a highly compact version
of the S. Neither supports velocity, and they have a very limited
color palette, so the mapping does not attempt to reflect the
Afterglow cue grid colors. Instead, colors are used to represent cue
state.

> The mapping of these controllers was made possible thanks to the
  kind loan of a Launchpad Mini for that purpose by Novation.

[[cue-grid-colors]]
=== Launchpad Mini and S Cue Grid Colors

Pads which have no cues associated with them are dark. If the pad has
a cue that is not running, it will be amber. If the pad's cue
conflicts with another cue that is running, it will be a dim amber.
Cues which are running are bright green; cues which are ending blink
red, as illustrated below.

The round buttons along the top are used to scroll around the grid,
using the same conventions as the decals which come with the Launchpad
Mini (and the arrows printed on the Launchpad S). The User 2 button
can be used suspend and resume the Afterglow mapping. The round
buttons on the right side are used to adjust the metronome, and start
or stop the show, as shown:

[[launchpad-mini-image]]
image::LaunchpadMini.jpg[Launchpad Mini interface,1186,1194]

> The Tap Tempo button corresponds to the button labeled Volume on the
Launchpad S (and on the decal which comes with the Launchpad Mini),
the Stop button matches the decal and printed label, and the Shift
button corresponds to the Arm button. Although the locations of these
buttons are different, they light up and respond as described in the
<<using-launchpad-pro,Launchpad Pro>> instructions above.

Cues which run only while you hold them down will light up as bright
amber instead of green while you are holding them, to let you know
they will end as soon as you release the pad. As with other controller
mappings, if you hold down the Shift button (the bottom right round
button) while launching such a momentary cue, it will stay running
even after you let it go, and in that case will be green.
